Okay, let's get started.
NOTE CONF
So if you haven't already, please scan the QR code.
We'll again have some interactive.
NOTE CONF
Exercises on Wall Club.
So today we're going to talk about language again.
NOTE CONF
So building on the the Friday where we talked about
rules and words.
NOTE CONF
Now we're going to talk about what this means in
cognitive terms.
NOTE CONF
And in particular I'd like to talk about language acquisition.
So language acquisition is the process.
NOTE CONF
Maybe this isn't loud enough.
Language acquisition is the process of acquiring a language.
NOTE CONF
Learning a language in particular in children.
So cognitive scientists, when they talk about language acquisition, they're
NOTE CONF
mostly interested in child language acquisition.
I mean, a few people also study language acquisition in
NOTE CONF
adults, but it's generally thought to be quite a different
process from first language acquisition.
NOTE CONF
So here we'll only talk about first language acquisition.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is really interesting.
So this is the game plan.
NOTE CONF
We're going to talk about the past tense.
Because the past tense has been used as a as
NOTE CONF
a case study, as sort of a and an exemplar
that people have used to study language acquisition.
NOTE CONF
And we'll see why in a moment.
And then we'll look at what kind of evidence we
NOTE CONF
normally rely on.
And then we'll try to sort of zoom out a
NOTE CONF
little bit and talk about knowledge acquisition more generally, and
different views of how that happens in cognitive science in
NOTE CONF
particular will come back to a neatness.
If you remember, lecture two where we talk about talked
NOTE CONF
about cultural evolution and innate knowledge versus learned knowledge.
So this sort of debate also looms large in terms
NOTE CONF
of language acquisition or knowledge acquisition more generally.
Then there's a preview, just two slides talking about neural
NOTE CONF
networks, which will start in earnest on Wednesday.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
On Thursday and on Friday.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Just to recap basically what we said on Friday.
Um, so we have argued that human language involves two
NOTE CONF
types of mental tissue, two types of mechanisms and two
types of knowledge.
NOTE CONF
Uh, there's a lexicon of words.
These are stored.
NOTE CONF
They're retrieved from memory.
Um, it's a finite list.
NOTE CONF
Uh, precomputed, readily available, presumably also very fast to access.
And if you've attended the tutorials, uh, will we have
NOTE CONF
seen quite a lot of examples there of stuff that
is precomputed in other languages as well.
NOTE CONF
Not just in English.
If not, well, go to one of the tutorials this
NOTE CONF
week to find out.
And in addition to that, there's a set of rules
NOTE CONF
of computational procedures that act upon those stored lexical items,
for example, to to construct sentences, but also to construct
NOTE CONF
words and more complicated words from simpler words, for example,
by affectation.
NOTE CONF
So you like, like it would be a fixation process,
or the compounding train and conductor becomes train conductor and
NOTE CONF
so on.
So the rules can act upon words as well as
NOTE CONF
on phrases and sentences.
We've talked about this notation here, which is called context
NOTE CONF
for grammar notation, where the words are written as lexical
items like this determiner goes to the where there is
NOTE CONF
is an article or a determiner, and n goes to
dog.
NOTE CONF
So this is the part of speech for dog.
And then we can have rules that construct phrases.
NOTE CONF
So a noun phrase is made up of a determinant
a noun a verb phrase is made up of a
NOTE CONF
verb and a noun phrase.
And then if we have a sufficiently large quantity of
NOTE CONF
of words and rules, then we can use that to
parse sentences, to turn them into syntax trees, to turn
NOTE CONF
them into structures.
These structures are useful a for computing whether a sentence
NOTE CONF
is part of the language is grammatical or not.
And b they can also be used in deriving the
NOTE CONF
meaning for the sentence.
And again the tutorial talks about that a bit more.
NOTE CONF
So at this point this is just a hypothesis, right?
This is something that linguists have dreamed up.
NOTE CONF
And how do we know whether speakers actually do this?
They actually store lexical items in the in their brains,
NOTE CONF
and they actually apply rules On those lexical items to
compute sentences.
NOTE CONF
How would we even test this?
There's various ways of getting evidence.
NOTE CONF
People have looked at large amounts of speech or text,
so-called corpora of data, and try to find patterns, patterns
NOTE CONF
that repeat.
And, uh, it seemed to be rule governed, seemed to
NOTE CONF
be, um, evidence for certain structures reoccurring all the time.
Um, certain things are possible, certain things are impossible.
NOTE CONF
And if you just look at enough data and use,
uh, statistical algorithms on those data, then you can, uh,
NOTE CONF
you can try to test whether there's rules, whether there's,
uh, whether there's regularities of the type that linguists have
NOTE CONF
assumed.
And, of course, you know, you've all played with large
NOTE CONF
language models.
These large language models that are trained on a lot
NOTE CONF
of data.
Much more data than any human can consume in a
NOTE CONF
lifetime.
So billions, trillions of words.
NOTE CONF
And they don't use any rules, right?
They don't even have lexical items in the same way
NOTE CONF
that we have postulated here.
So that's already a little bit of evidence that maybe
NOTE CONF
a grammar is not necessary.
It doesn't mean that humans do it in the same
NOTE CONF
way.
It just means it's possible for a sufficiently large model
NOTE CONF
and sufficiently complicated learning algorithm to acquire behaviour that looks
as if it's governed by rules.
NOTE CONF
And this is something we'll come back to.
Another thing people have done, they've studied human language processing
NOTE CONF
in real time, because this rule and word distinction makes
claims about processing.
NOTE CONF
It would, for example, entail that things that are stored
in the lexicon, they're really quick to access.
NOTE CONF
Right.
You just have to retrieve them then then they're ready.
NOTE CONF
Whereas if you apply those rules, then maybe this takes
more time, maybe more complicated rules.
NOTE CONF
Write rules that have low frequency items that have a
lot of elements on the right hand side.
NOTE CONF
Maybe these take longer if you apply a lot of
rules, maybe that takes takes more time.
NOTE CONF
So a phrase that is made up of lots of
different rules would take more time than a phrase that's
NOTE CONF
made up of just a single rule and so on.
So this is something you can you can test.
NOTE CONF
You can, for example, do brain imaging.
You can do reaction time studies.
NOTE CONF
You can do eye tracking studies.
These are all, uh, ways of getting evidence for the
NOTE CONF
real time process that happens while we are listening or
reading or while we're speaking or writing.
NOTE CONF
And another way of looking at this is to look
at the sort of errors that people make.
NOTE CONF
And these are often systematic.
Certain errors occur frequently.
NOTE CONF
Others occur not at all.
And then looking at the patterns of errors.
NOTE CONF
Maybe also for corpora, right?
Text often doesn't contain a lot of errors.
NOTE CONF
But speech, you know, as I speak now, I make
errors.
NOTE CONF
I use the wrong word, I don't finish my sentences
and so on.
NOTE CONF
Maybe this is also interesting in terms of evidence.
And then a fourth type of evidence is from language
NOTE CONF
acquisition to see what happens during language acquisition.
People obviously don't start speaking from the day they're born.
NOTE CONF
They start speaking sort of between 12 and 15 months.
And they don't they're not fluent speakers of the language
NOTE CONF
from from the start.
It actually takes quite a lot of time.
NOTE CONF
And so it's interesting to look at this process again.
Look at the errors.
NOTE CONF
Look at what kind of utterances they are able to
produce, how they become more complicated, how they mirror the
NOTE CONF
language that they hear from adults and so on.
So the acquisition hopefully also tells us about how language
NOTE CONF
is actually used in cognitive terms.
And here we'll look at in particular past tense because
NOTE CONF
that is an interesting example where some things are memorised
and some things are rule based.
NOTE CONF
And it's a bit like a fruit fly, right?
If you're a geneticist and you always study fruit flies
NOTE CONF
as a model organism.
So we look at the past tense as a type
NOTE CONF
of model organism.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So some quick facts about the past tense.
So well there's a very simple rule.
NOTE CONF
Just add ed to the present tense or to the
to the base form of a verb.
NOTE CONF
And then you get the past tense like liked.
And at least for regular verbs, there isn't really a
NOTE CONF
finite set.
You can always make new verbs in English.
NOTE CONF
It's very easy to turn a noun into a verb
Um, and so new concepts arise all the time.
NOTE CONF
So new words are coined.
And these can be verbs as well as nouns.
NOTE CONF
So here are some simple examples.
Jog becomes jog to walk becomes walked.
NOTE CONF
Play becomes played.
Kids becomes kissed.
NOTE CONF
But also these relatively new verbs like spam, mosh, which
is a type of, you know, dancing Pluto.
NOTE CONF
You can say this planet was Pluto, which means it
was relegated to a dwarf planet.
NOTE CONF
And there's actually quite a few dwarf planets, not just
Pluto.
NOTE CONF
Grok is sort of a I don't know.
For me, this is a Gen Z word of, and
NOTE CONF
it means understanding something.
Um, and of course, the same rule applies even though
NOTE CONF
these are new words spammed, mosh, Pluto dropped, and so
on.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so far, so good.
However, the story is slightly more complicated.
NOTE CONF
If we look at verbs like this buy, hold still,
go.
NOTE CONF
So buy it, hold it still, and so on are
not grammatical in English.
NOTE CONF
So this asterisk means it's not grammatical.
And instead we have these forms here.
NOTE CONF
Bought.
Held.
NOTE CONF
Stole.
Went.
NOTE CONF
Uh, these are so familiar and frequent that we don't
even notice, right?
NOTE CONF
Irregular verbs like this.
If you learn the language, you somehow need to pick
NOTE CONF
up these irregular verbs.
And you need to somehow learn.
NOTE CONF
And you don't say buy it.
You need to say bought instead.
NOTE CONF
And then, of course, there is sort of islands of
regularity, even in the irregular verbs.
NOTE CONF
So it's sing sang ring rang.
So these obviously are similar in even though they're both
NOTE CONF
irregular, but it's not clean clang or think tank.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So there's, uh, irregular verbs and some of them have
a common pattern.
NOTE CONF
But then there's exceptions to those common patterns as well.
So it's reasonably interesting what's going on here.
NOTE CONF
And how could the child possibly master that?
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
But just to summarise what I've said.
NOTE CONF
So some past tense forms are not just Ed, but
they are still somewhat regular, like singsong ring rung.
NOTE CONF
Um, historically, actually this was a different type of, uh,
past tense, which no longer exists except in these irregular
NOTE CONF
verbs.
Um, so it is a bit chaotic and idiosyncratic and,
NOTE CONF
but it's a small number of irregular verbs, 150 to
180 and, uh, hasn't been really augmented recently, so sneak
NOTE CONF
snuck seems to be the latest addition in the 19th
century.
NOTE CONF
Um, so let's actually have a short quiz so that
you can try this out yourself.
NOTE CONF
So if you haven't, uh, scan the QR code, I'll
give you 30s to do it now.
NOTE CONF
You.
Can do.
NOTE CONF
That.
We're going to do that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's maybe move on.
NOTE CONF
So if you could please guess the past tense forms
of these verbs.
NOTE CONF
And of course, I've, I've taken some verbs that are
a bit more complicated and new or infrequent and so
NOTE CONF
on.
So just, uh, try to type the past tense forms
NOTE CONF
for those.
There's just a lot.
NOTE CONF
Of support.
So as you can see, they come in two categories.
NOTE CONF
The first.
The first part are weird.
NOTE CONF
Irregular verbs in the second part are low, frequent low
frequency verbs that you might not have seen.
NOTE CONF
They all occur in the dictionary.
So I did check that I didn't just make them
NOTE CONF
up.
Some.
NOTE CONF
It's.
Okay, let's leave it there.
NOTE CONF
See what you found.
So we can see the most frequent answers here.
NOTE CONF
They're still changing a little bit.
So bit.
NOTE CONF
Most people think bid is, uh.
Is the past tense like in.
NOTE CONF
Yesterday I bid on something on eBay.
And that's correct.
NOTE CONF
But, um.
Bid bid it.
NOTE CONF
I don't think is possible, but bad is also possible.
Um, like I bathe her.
NOTE CONF
Goodbye.
It's slightly archaic.
NOTE CONF
So that already makes it more tricky if you have
multiple past tense forms like this.
NOTE CONF
Closed.
So that works.
NOTE CONF
But clad is also a form only a few people
have guessed this.
NOTE CONF
So typically sort of in fixed expressions like ironclad, but
it's an old past tense form.
NOTE CONF
And then for sake.
So forsaken would actually be the past participle, not the
NOTE CONF
past tense.
So for succ is the.
NOTE CONF
Is the correct the correct past tense form?
Forsaken in I have forsaken him, right?
NOTE CONF
So that's the past participle.
It's not the past tense.
NOTE CONF
And here, apparently slunk is correct.
I actually need to check myself.
NOTE CONF
Slang is correct.
And the other ones are just regular.
NOTE CONF
Simp is apparently giving someone unwanted attention.
Nerf I think is attacking someone with a Nerf gun,
NOTE CONF
but I'm not sure.
And Josh is making something more interesting and more exciting.
NOTE CONF
So, like, he's juiced up his wardrobe.
Something like that.
NOTE CONF
And there you have.
Maybe not seen this before, but you can tell they're
NOTE CONF
probably regular.
Whereas for slunk, something tells you that this is a
NOTE CONF
bit like sink sunk, right?
Even if you haven't seen it before.
NOTE CONF
So it's irregular.
So and this just sort of reinforces the point.
NOTE CONF
How do children figure it out?
Well, from the rules and word's point of view this
NOTE CONF
is really straightforward.
You can have a very simple rule, right.
NOTE CONF
You can have a verb in a base form.
You add ed and then you get the verb in
NOTE CONF
the past tense form.
Or if you write it as a rule then this
NOTE CONF
would just be v.
Past goes to V, let's say base form and Eddie.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so super simple rule, which of course doesn't account
for the, um, for the irregular ones.
NOTE CONF
So you could assume that the irregular ones.
So this is for, uh, for the regular ones, you
NOTE CONF
have this rule, and for the irregular ones, you just
stick it in the lexicon, hold in the lexicon as
NOTE CONF
the base form held in the lexicon, in the past
form, the past tense form, and together with all the
NOTE CONF
other stuff that sits in the lexicon.
What's the sound, what's the spelling, the meaning of, of
NOTE CONF
the verb and so on.
So.
NOTE CONF
That's really easy, right?
Or is there a potential problem in this story?
NOTE CONF
You just assume more lexical entries to cover the irregular
verbs, the regular ones.
NOTE CONF
You can just write a rule what's what can go
wrong?
NOTE CONF
So the problem is that nothing prevents me from applying
this rule also to the irregular ones, right?
NOTE CONF
So I can apply it to this lexical entry and
get hold it as well.
NOTE CONF
As well as health which is already in the lexicon.
So irregular ones are stored as words.
NOTE CONF
A rule generates the regular past tenses.
And then how do I avoid hold it and steal
NOTE CONF
and so on.
And the answer that linguists normally give.
NOTE CONF
Well, if a form already exists in the lexicon, then
the rule is blocked.
NOTE CONF
So somehow you need to assume a mechanism that before
you apply this rule here you check the lexicon whether
NOTE CONF
the output already exists.
So whether there is already a past tense form for
NOTE CONF
hold, for example.
And then you don't apply this.
NOTE CONF
So you have some mechanism that prevents you from applying,
uh, applying this rule.
NOTE CONF
And um, well, this works as a mechanism, but it's
not really an explanation, right?
NOTE CONF
So it's actually a bit ugly.
And it's also something that you don't, you know, it's
NOTE CONF
outside the grammar and the lexicon.
It's an extra thing that you need to assume.
NOTE CONF
You see in in other places too.
So if you think about the process that turns an
NOTE CONF
animal into food.
So for example, you can say, I ate chicken tonight,
NOTE CONF
I will eat chicken tonight, but you can't say I
will eat cow tonight.
NOTE CONF
You have to say I'll eat beef tonight.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So there's this process that turns an animal into an
animal word into a food word.
NOTE CONF
But it's blocked for things like beef and pork and
maybe game as well.
NOTE CONF
So the blocking happens in other parts of the lexicon
as well.
NOTE CONF
But it's it's an unexplained mechanism basically that we have
to assume.
NOTE CONF
And this already tells you, well, maybe there's something not
so great about the words and rules account if it
NOTE CONF
needs to rely on stuff like blocking as well.
Okay, but let's look at what actually happens during language
NOTE CONF
acquisition.
So you can obviously study what children do at a
NOTE CONF
certain age.
So these are examples from preschoolers.
NOTE CONF
And you can look at the verb form.
So they say things like it was neat.
NOTE CONF
You should have seen it instead of seen.
So this sounds like an irregular verb but it's not
NOTE CONF
the right one.
Doggy bad to me.
NOTE CONF
Rather than beat me again, this is an irregular one,
but somehow the child has picked up the wrong form,
NOTE CONF
or maybe generated the wrong form using some sort of
rule that the Cheerios got eaten by Maki instead of
NOTE CONF
eaten.
I know how to do that.
NOTE CONF
I truck myself well, truck is an irregular version of
trick.
NOTE CONF
Trick truck like stick stuck.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
This is the best place I ever thought.
Rather than sad.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so children actually do make mistakes like that.
And, uh, quite frequently at least, uh, in the early
NOTE CONF
years.
So, uh, these don't suddenly stop when children start school.
NOTE CONF
Um, the, um.
It it cannot all be education.
NOTE CONF
I mean, some of it is that children get corrected
at school, perhaps, but they persist making these these errors
NOTE CONF
for quite a while.
And, uh, it could be that certain, you know, uh,
NOTE CONF
very infrequent past tense forms the children may never encounter.
So how are they going to learn those?
NOTE CONF
And maybe sometimes they just create them by analogy.
So this seems to be what is happening here.
NOTE CONF
Like truck instead of tricked.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Uh, stick.
Stuck.
NOTE CONF
Trick truck makes sense and is a bit like the
ones we've seen here, right where the sing song ring
NOTE CONF
rang.
Clang clang might be an overgeneralisation.
NOTE CONF
So we see these patterns, and it's also interesting in
the sense that the types of error they change with
NOTE CONF
time.
And they're not just confined to plurals, so they overuse
NOTE CONF
other processes like plural formation, man man's foot foods to
tooth, mouth, mouses, fish, fishes.
NOTE CONF
My children said this all the time.
Fishes overuse the third person singular dos bees.
NOTE CONF
Normally you just stick an s at the end of
the base form if you want to have the third
NOTE CONF
person, but obviously have and do and b are irregular
comparatives.
NOTE CONF
Imperatives.
Special special.
NOTE CONF
Powerful powerful list.
So there's a lot of overgeneralisation and and morphological errors
NOTE CONF
like that going on numerals one tooth instead of first
and second.
NOTE CONF
They're quite creative.
Here's an example.
NOTE CONF
So parent says no booze in the house.
And the child says what's the booze?
NOTE CONF
So they think booze is a plural.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
It did.
It's new instead of it's node.
NOTE CONF
So again, one of these fake irregulars that can happen
as as errors in child language.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so if you observe children over a longer period
of time than you actually load a particular pattern, which
NOTE CONF
is sometimes called the U-shaped curve in development.
So in the first stage, children produce both irregular and
NOTE CONF
irregular forms.
They don't make a lot of errors.
NOTE CONF
Also, they don't know a lot of verbs yet at
that point.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So they're still very young, I don't know, 15 months,
NOTE CONF
18 months, something like that.
Uh, then later on, uh, they produce a lot of
NOTE CONF
regular verbs and also try to regularise the irregular ones.
So you would hear things like hold it and bite
NOTE CONF
and so on.
So suddenly you have a lot of errors and they're
NOTE CONF
mostly overregulate like that.
And then later on the errors reduce again, and the
NOTE CONF
children have mastered both the regular and the irregular form,
and the errors go down and close to zero.
NOTE CONF
So if you if you draw this here, you have
time on, on the x axis and proportion.
NOTE CONF
Correct.
Here on the y axis.
NOTE CONF
Then initially there's a lot of correct forms.
Then they go down a lot of errors.
NOTE CONF
And then there's again a lot of correct forms.
And this is actually a general pattern that you will
NOTE CONF
see in other domains as well.
It's not just for past tense, it's not just for
NOTE CONF
language.
There's this U-shaped curve.
NOTE CONF
And let's try to figure out why we see this
U-shaped curve.
NOTE CONF
What is going on.
So why do the errors first increase and then decrease
NOTE CONF
again?
And where is my wall club.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's assume there's a few stages that happen during
NOTE CONF
language acquisition.
And that corresponds to the different elements of the U-shaped
NOTE CONF
curve.
So we have our curve.
NOTE CONF
And then we have four stages.
Um What do these stages correspond to?
NOTE CONF
So we're basically assuming that different mechanisms are engaged during
those four stages.
NOTE CONF
So irregular past tense forms are memorised.
Past tense forms are generated using rules.
NOTE CONF
All past tense forms are memorised.
Regular past tense forms are generated using rules.
NOTE CONF
So which, uh, which order would you have to assume
so that you get this pattern?
NOTE CONF
Arrow first goes down and then first goes up and
then goes down again.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I'll give you another 30s.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's see.
So the most frequent answers answer is regular past tense
NOTE CONF
forms are generated using rules.
Then all past tense forms are generated using rules.
NOTE CONF
And then irregular past tense forms are memorised.
And then all past tense forms are memorised.
NOTE CONF
So that doesn't sound right.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Because you would have to assume that.
Uh let's see.
NOTE CONF
So regular past tense forms so.
We.
NOTE CONF
Don't get errors and then you get more errors.
Irregular forms and memories.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
And this would actually produce the patterns.
NOTE CONF
But of course the problem is why do you abandon
the rules.
NOTE CONF
Right.
That doesn't seem like a very plausible assumption that you
NOTE CONF
start with rules and then you move from there to
memorising everything.
NOTE CONF
So presumably it's the other way round.
So the the correct answer is this.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Hold on.
NOTE CONF
This is the correct answer.
So all past tense forms are memorised whether they're regular
NOTE CONF
or irregular.
I can of course also memorise the irregular ones.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Like walked liked.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
But it doesn't matter whether regular or not.
NOTE CONF
I just put everything in the lexicon and then I
have very high correctness, right?
NOTE CONF
So here's correctness.
So I mean this in this stage.
NOTE CONF
But then the child suddenly realises, well, there's really many
more verbs than I can care to memorise.
NOTE CONF
And there is actually a regularity as well.
I can just tick ed on things.
NOTE CONF
So let's forget all the memorised forms, and instead just
use this rule and generate all the forms regular or
NOTE CONF
irregular.
And that explains the overgeneralisation, right?
NOTE CONF
The the application that gives you bite and held it
and hold it and so on.
NOTE CONF
But of course, the error rate, the correctness goes down.
So I'm down here.
NOTE CONF
And.
Then the opposite.
NOTE CONF
Potentially the child tries the opposite.
It tries to memorise all the forms, but then it
NOTE CONF
acquires this blocking principle and realises that some past tense
forms are acquired, are generated using rules and some are
NOTE CONF
memorised.
And then that's a possibility.
NOTE CONF
That's a way of getting everything correct.
All right.
NOTE CONF
You can generate all the regular verbs and even the
ones you haven't seen before, but the irregular ones you
NOTE CONF
need to memorise.
And for that, you also need to apply the blocking
NOTE CONF
principle.
So it's basically memorising everything, acquiring the rule and over
NOTE CONF
generalising, then realising that the rule doesn't apply to all
the all the verbs.
NOTE CONF
And then you increase the correctness again.
So and this is nice because it makes use of
NOTE CONF
this distinction between rules and lexical items.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Between things that are stored.
And you can just retrieve as a, as a chunk
NOTE CONF
and things that are generated on the fly using a
rule.
NOTE CONF
So more generally this is known as a knowledge acquisition
problem.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Where does the knowledge come from.
NOTE CONF
We're certainly we're born with some things, but we're not
born knowing everything we need to know.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise, you know, we didn't really have to go to
school or university or anything.
NOTE CONF
If we knew everything we ever needed to know.
But then, of course, you can ask the the opposite
NOTE CONF
question.
Do we know anything at birth?
NOTE CONF
Or is everything just learned through exposure?
So is the mind as as we're born completely blank,
NOTE CONF
or is there some rudimentary understanding of the world?
And this is the old debate about the maintenance that
NOTE CONF
we already talked about last time.
So which parts of our knowledge, which mechanisms and which
NOTE CONF
representations are innate?
What's the contribution of biology to our cognitive abilities as
NOTE CONF
opposed to experience.
Experience things that we've seen and learned and that are
NOTE CONF
determined through communication, cultural interaction, and so on.
If it's innate, then people normally assume it's genetically determined.
NOTE CONF
It's ultimately in the DNA.
If it's experienced, then it's not in the DNA.
NOTE CONF
It's something that we need to learn.
Maybe the learning mechanism is innate.
NOTE CONF
That would be a compromise.
And this corresponds to the distinction between biological evolution and
NOTE CONF
cultural transmission.
If you remember this idea of cognitive gadgets, things like
NOTE CONF
reading is something that enhances our cognitive function but it's
not something that is genetic.
NOTE CONF
So for reading, we know because it's too young to
be encoded in our DNA, because biological evolution is a
NOTE CONF
very slow process, so it must be culturally transmitted.
But here, these regular irregular verbs.
NOTE CONF
Is that something that's innate?
Maybe the blocking mechanism is innate.
NOTE CONF
Maybe the ability to infer rules from data.
Maybe that's innate.
NOTE CONF
And we will see more about that starting tomorrow.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Starting Thursday.
This debate you can also.
NOTE CONF
So if you're maybe there's some philosophers in the room,
you can link this back to an old debate in
NOTE CONF
philosophy between rationalism and empiricism.
So philosophers like Descartes, Spinoza or Leibniz who assumed essentially
NOTE CONF
that our cognitive mechanisms are innate.
There is things like causality.
NOTE CONF
Things like time.
There's categories that we're born with and we don't have
NOTE CONF
to learn.
That basically make it possible to even experience things or
NOTE CONF
learn things.
And then there's another bunch of philosophers, Locke, Berkeley, Hume,
NOTE CONF
who basically thought we were born as a blank slate.
We we just learn everything from scratch, from experience.
NOTE CONF
And this distinction between rationalism and empiricism mirrors the distinction
in modern times between innate knowledge and learned knowledge.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
So rationalism is often also associated with a certain mechanism,
NOTE CONF
with a mechanism based on rules and symbols and logic
and so on.
NOTE CONF
And of course, our grammar rules are an example there.
In modern times, people like Noam Chomsky advocated this, sometimes
NOTE CONF
called nativism as well because it assumes innate structures.
Knowledge is logical.
NOTE CONF
It's based on calculations, and empiricism is about connecting together
what we've experienced and building experience from build building knowledge
NOTE CONF
from experience bottom up.
In psychology, people like Pavlov and Skinner are associated with
NOTE CONF
this.
Or neural networks in some sense are a very radical
NOTE CONF
form of empiricism because the network really doesn't have anything
right.
NOTE CONF
You just have a very powerful learning learning algorithm.
So you start with a blank slate and you generalise
NOTE CONF
from observations.
And the truth, as often, is probably somewhere in the
NOTE CONF
middle.
So we have clear evidence that some things are innate.
NOTE CONF
So here are the pictures of babies.
And the babies have quite a lot of reflexes when
NOTE CONF
they're born.
So immediately when they're born, they don't have any time
NOTE CONF
to experience anything.
And they have, for example, the grasping reflex, sucking reflex
NOTE CONF
step reflex where they you put them in a certain
position, they can't walk yet nothing.
NOTE CONF
But they have the reflex to take a step sucking
reflex obviously needed for feeding and so on.
NOTE CONF
So there's definitely some things that are innate, and that's
maybe not surprising because animals have that too.
NOTE CONF
They have innate reflexes, and some animals only have these
reflexes.
NOTE CONF
They're not able to learn much.
I don't know if you are a tapeworm or something
NOTE CONF
like that.
So they come into the world with a variety of
NOTE CONF
skills.
These are often domain specific, so they can only do
NOTE CONF
one very specialised thing.
And even if you were an empiricist and you think
NOTE CONF
everything is acquired by learning from from experience, then still
you need to assume that the learning mechanism is is
NOTE CONF
innate, and you need to explain why certain things are
learned by children from very early on, for example, language,
NOTE CONF
but others are not.
For example, calculus.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Why do we not have a learning mechanism that allows
NOTE CONF
us to learn calculus at the age of 18 months?
Okay, so.
NOTE CONF
There is probably both elements innate innate mechanisms and innate
representations and ones that are gained by experience.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's think about this distinction a little bit more.
NOTE CONF
And there's another quiz.
And.
NOTE CONF
Here are some candidates for cognitive abilities that may be
innate.
NOTE CONF
So you get a vote.
Which ones do you think are innate.
NOTE CONF
Reading and writing.
estimating and comparing quantities, social norms and etiquette, and so
NOTE CONF
on.
So take a few minutes and think about whether this
NOTE CONF
could possibly be innate or not.
But I.
NOTE CONF
Still want to start with.
You know.
NOTE CONF
What I mean?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
I mean.
I didn't know.
NOTE CONF
I.
Was going to be.
NOTE CONF
Honest.
Okay, a few more seconds.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What do people think?
NOTE CONF
Reading and writing.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So I've already talked about that reading.
Writing very unlikely to be innate given that it is
NOTE CONF
so recent.
In evolutionary terms, it's a cultural skill, which is amazing
NOTE CONF
because reading is almost as automatic as many other cognitive
functions.
NOTE CONF
Right?
If if I know how to read, then it's something
NOTE CONF
that is extremely fast, is extremely reliable.
It's it works unconsciously in the sense that if I
NOTE CONF
see a sign in a language that I speak, I
cannot not read it right.
NOTE CONF
I cannot consciously avoid reading it.
And, um.
NOTE CONF
It's also extremely fast, faster than listening and speaking, actually.
So the reading rate of the average adult is about
NOTE CONF
200 words per second.
Speaking is less is about 120 words per second.
NOTE CONF
So it's pretty amazing since something like that isn't innate
given how, uh, clever and efficient it is.
NOTE CONF
Estimating and comparing quantities.
Yes, there's a pretty good evidence that this is innate,
NOTE CONF
um, because of the developmental trajectory.
This is similar to language in that children make a
NOTE CONF
very predictable pattern of errors.
And we'll actually talk about that later on in the
NOTE CONF
course.
We'll talk about also that quantity seems to be something
NOTE CONF
that is cross-culturally Truly universal.
Even in cultures that don't have the same number system,
NOTE CONF
that you don't even have words for numbers.
Counting and comparing quantities is still acquired in the same
NOTE CONF
way.
Social norms and etiquettes, basically, by definition, almost are not
NOTE CONF
innate.
It may be that there's a certain universality to what
NOTE CONF
is a possible social norm, but the individual norms are
probably not innate spatial navigation.
NOTE CONF
Again, very good evidence that it's innate also because animals
are very good at it.
NOTE CONF
And that is often an indication that, yes, perhaps it's
it's innate if it doesn't require, you know, because animals
NOTE CONF
don't normally take 18 years to acquire all the knowledge
they need, and then another three years or four years
NOTE CONF
at university.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Animals don't have the time.
So if they can do it, then it's more likely
NOTE CONF
to be innate scientific reasoning.
Maybe certain concepts like time and causality.
NOTE CONF
Those could be innate, but by and large it shouldn't
be innate.
NOTE CONF
Playing an instrument again is evolutionarily probably too young to
be innate.
NOTE CONF
Face recognition is a very good example.
And yeah, you're right in saying that this is probably
NOTE CONF
innate in the sense that children react even at birth,
react to faces differently than to other visual stimuli.
NOTE CONF
And obviously they can't recognise individual faces, but they can
recognise that something is a face.
NOTE CONF
And so it seems like they're born with this ability
to distinguish faces from non faces.
NOTE CONF
And the same with emotion recognition and even in animals,
primates and so on.
NOTE CONF
They are good at recognising emotions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is really a preview for Thursday's lecture.
So this is an approach that emerged in the 1980s.
NOTE CONF
Um, and yes, so some people think deep learning is
sort of, you know, started with Jeff Hinton in 2015
NOTE CONF
or something like that.
But it's actually a lot older.
NOTE CONF
The technology was invented in the 1980s.
Some aspects even earlier than that.
NOTE CONF
And it started with a book called Parallel Distributed Processing
and actually two volumes.
NOTE CONF
The first one contains models, the second one contains.
Well, the first one contains models.
NOTE CONF
The second one contains architectures, particular architectures like recurrent neural
networks or feedforward neural networks.
NOTE CONF
And in particular contains the the training algorithm back propagation
that is used to this day for training neural networks,
NOTE CONF
even modern ones like transformers that weren't invented yet in
the 80s.
NOTE CONF
And we'll actually talk about back propagation on Friday.
Um, it was called parallel distributed processing, which is not
NOTE CONF
really a name that people use at this point, parallel
because it contains, well, the networks, they contain lots of
NOTE CONF
simple independent computations and distributed because the information is distributed
across the network.
NOTE CONF
It's not represented in an easily accessible way, but it
uses these so-called distributed representations.
NOTE CONF
And that's still the case for today's networks.
And we'll actually see examples later on in the course
NOTE CONF
when we talk about semantic embeddings, which are examples of
these distributed representations.
NOTE CONF
And so he isn't on on this on the title,
but uh, Geoff Hinton, who I already mentioned and who
NOTE CONF
obviously just got the Nobel Prize, um, he was one
of the authors of the PDP books.
NOTE CONF
Right?
He's is actually the author of several articles.
NOTE CONF
The books contain a bunch of different articles for different
models, and he's the author of several of those.
NOTE CONF
Incidentally, he did his PhD in Edinburgh.
So no bragging.
NOTE CONF
But, um, anyway, so why do we care?
We care because if you believe in this distinction between
NOTE CONF
radical, between empiricism and rationalism, then neural networks or PDP
or deep learning or whatever you want to call it,
NOTE CONF
is an incarnation of empiricism in the most radical possible
way, in that you assume a very simple architecture, and
NOTE CONF
we'll get to know the architecture on Thursday and Friday.
We start with a very simple one called a perceptron.
NOTE CONF
Then we make it slightly more complicated, called a feed
forward network, which is basically an assembly of assembly of
NOTE CONF
perceptrons.
So you have this very general architecture and you have
NOTE CONF
a very general learning algorithm, backpropagation or gradient descent more
generally.
NOTE CONF
And this is it.
Basically this is the technology that can do all these
NOTE CONF
amazing things, from image recognition to controlling a robot to
ChatGPT and so on.
NOTE CONF
And you need that and you need a lot of
data.
NOTE CONF
Well, and a lot of compute ultimately.
But it is basically assuming a blank slate where you
NOTE CONF
only have this powerful architecture and the powerful learning algorithm.
You don't need to have anything language specific, anything specific
NOTE CONF
to vision or motor control for all the domains, you
can use the same architecture.
NOTE CONF
And that is pretty amazing.
In the 1980s, people couldn't really exploit it because we
NOTE CONF
didn't have the the compute and we didn't have the
data and we didn't have the training algorithms.
NOTE CONF
But then in the 2000 People had all these things
and then, well, the rest is history.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so to summarise, we looked at the past tense
as a simple way of analysing and modelling language acquisition,
NOTE CONF
sort of a fruit fly, a model organism, a very
simple mechanism that we can study and we'll actually come
NOTE CONF
back to next week.
Um, we looked at children's acquisition of the past tense
NOTE CONF
and of irregular things in the language in general, and
we saw these stages that give you a U-shaped curve
NOTE CONF
where initially they make very few errors, then they make
a lot of errors, and then they stop making errors
NOTE CONF
again.
And we explained this by saying they memorise everything first,
NOTE CONF
then they discover the rule and then apply the rule
to everything.
NOTE CONF
And then they recognise that the rule needs to apply
to certain things, but not to others.
NOTE CONF
Some things need to be memorised, some things need to
be rule based.
NOTE CONF
And that is the official story of the words, word
and rules framework.
NOTE CONF
But starting next week, we look at the alternative story
of the neural network literature, where you don't have to
NOTE CONF
assume any rules, you don't have to assume any, uh,
any lexicon, but you can still get this behaviour.
NOTE CONF
Um, and more generally, we talked about things being innate
or things being learned.
NOTE CONF
I still have five minutes.
I think, uh, things being innate or things being learned.
NOTE CONF
And we situated this in the more general philosophical frameworks
of empiricism and rationalism.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, I'm very happy to take questions.
As I said, there's five minutes left in the in
NOTE CONF
the lecture.
Any questions?
NOTE CONF
People are keen to leave.
Well, see you the day after tomorrow, then.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.